---
layout: default
---

In the past decade, data-driven analysis has emerged as a growing methodology, if not sub-discipline within literary studies. This approach, broadly described as “_distant reading_”, has harnessed available technology to open new avenues for how we understand literary texts, both individually and in the aggregate. Whereas traditional literary scholarship is generally grounded in the interpretation of the specific language of a text or body of texts, macroanalytic approaches have offered new ways of seeing texts. Rather than generating claims based upon the interpretation of a handful of novels, distant reading offers the opportunity to work with hundreds, if not thousands, of texts; this has led to analyses, for example, of the nature of and changes within semantic fields across the span of decades, or the identification of generic markers within large corpora of texts. However, while computational analysis provides the opportunity to pursue previously unimaginable questions, scholars are still in the early stages of establishing the significance and meaning of such approaches, particularly in relation to the inherited body of scholarship that defines the discipline. What, in other words, do the graphs, charts, and maps generated by data-driven analysis tell us about literature, and about what an individual text might mean? Thus, in addition to pursuing new questions and applying new methods in the computational analysis of literary texts, there is a continuing need to theorise the relationship between macroanalytic and microanalytic (distant and close) readings of individual works.

This project brings together researchers from computer science and literary studies to develop and evaluate novel distant reading approaches.

## [](#header-2-1)Project outcome I: Creating Transcendental Information Cascades from English Literature

## [](#header-2-2)Team

Led by Markus Luczak-Roesch and Adam Grener this interdisciplinary research project was supported under the spearheading digital futures theme, which is part of the areas of strategic distictiveness of Vicotria University of Wellington (http://www.victoria.ac.nz/about/strengths/digital-futures). 

### [](#header-3-1)Markus Luczak-Roesch

Markus Luczak-Roesch is a Senior Lecturer in Information Systems at the School for Information Management, Victoria Business School, Victoria University of Wellington. Before joining Victoria Markus worked as a Senior Research Fellow on the prestigious EPSRC programme grant SOCIAM - The Theory and Practice of Social Machines (http://sociam.org) at the University of Southampton, Electronics and Computer Science (UK, 2013-2016). A computer scientist by education, Markus investigates the formal properties of information in socio-technical systems and human factors of information and computing systems. More information: http://markus-luczak.de

### [](#header-3-2)Adam Grener

Adam Grener is Lecturer in the English Programme at Victoria University of Wellington. His main area of research is the nineteenth-century British novel, though he also has interest in the history of the novel, narrative theory, and computational approaches to literature. His work has appeared in the journals Genre, Narrative, and Modern Philology, and he is the co-editor of a special issue of Genre, "Narrative Against Data in the Victorian Novel," set to appear in March 2017. He is completing a book on realist aesthetics and the history of probabilistic thought. More information: http://www.victoria.ac.nz/seftms/about/staff/adam-grener

### [](#header-3-3)Research assistants
 * Emma Fenton
 * Tom Goldfinch
